Hercules, THE son of almighty Zeus and beau-
tiful mortal Alcmene, was the strongest man
who ever lived. Now when Hercules was eight months
old, he woke one night to find a monstrous snake
had coiled itself around him. Instead of crying out,
baby Hercules wrapped his tiny powerful hands
around the meaty throat of the snake and choked it to
death.

As a boy he had many wise teachers, including the
centaur Cheiron, and he was soon a master of wres-
tling and archery. He was handsome and had blazing
eyes. There was nothing Hercules feared.

When he was eighteen years old, he went out to
kill a raging lion that had been destroying the farmers’
cattle. He smashed its head with his club, killing it,
and took off its skin. He wore its fur over his shoul-
ders, with the lion’s head as his cap.

Hercules was so bold and so great that the gods,
especially his father Zeus, wanted him to bé one of:
themselves—an immortal.

The only immortal against this was Hera, Zeus’s
wile.

“A god!” she said with outrage. “He? The son of a
ridiculous woman! If you insist on his becoming a
god, he must do a god's work!”

And so began a nearly impossible series of ten
chores, the Labors of Hercules.

“If, and only if, you complete the labors King
Eurystheus gives you,” said Hera, “then you may live
among us on Mount Olympos.”

Eurystheus of Tiryns did not like this strong young
man, and for the first task gave Hercules one he
thought would be fatal. “Kill the Nemean lion,” he
ordered.

This lion was much more terrible than the previous
beast Hercules had killed. Hercules shot arrow after
arrow at it, which only made the Nemean lion yawn,
for the arrows could not pierce its skin. Hercules then
went after it with his bare hands. The savage Nemean
lion roared, and it slashed at Hercules with its claws.
Hercules wrestled it, threw it on the ground and then
choked it by its shaggy neck until it died.

When Hercules returned to Tiryns, the king was so
frightened by Hercules’ success that he did not allow
the man to come into his palace. Eurystheus called to
him from a high window and assigned him his sec-
ond labor, another task he was sure would kill mighty
Hercules: “Go and destroy the Hydra in Lerna.”

This Hydra was a snaky creature that had nine
heads, the one in the middle being immortal. It lived
in a cave, from which it would come out in order to
feast on cattle. When Hercules came to Lerna, it was
asleep in its cave. Hercules listened. All he heard was
a snaky whistling: “Whewsh! Whewsh!” Hercules shot
fire-tipped arrows into the cave until the Hydra, an-
gered by this nuisance, sprang out at him. Hercules
leaped upon the fierce Hydra’s neck, swinging his
sword and chopping off its heads. But for every head
he cut off, two more grew back. Within minutes there
were hundreds of Hydra heads hissing at him and
longing to devour him. Hercules called to his friend
lolaus, who had made the journey with him, to bring
a torch. This time as Hercules cut off the newly
sprung heads, he and his friend burned and sealed
the necks before the heads could grow back. This
worked well; and, even though a crab, friendly to the
Hydra, tried to annoy him, pinching his toes and
ankles, Hercules finally chopped off the unkillable
last head. He buried it under a tremendous rock,
where it still lives, hissing but unable to move. The
Hydra’s snaky body Hercules cut up, squeezing out
its poison to use on his arrows.

When he returned to the king and told him of his
success, the king, a cheating sort of man, said, “No,
you get no credit for that labor. You had help from
your friend. What I want now is the sacred Ceryntian
deer!”

This deer had golden antlers, and it belonged to
the goddess of hunting, Artemis. Hercules dared not
kill a goddess’s deer, and so for one entire year he
tracked it, finally wearing. it out with the chase. He
now captured it alive. Artemis forgave Hercules, as he
had not hurt her beautiful deer, and she allowed him
to bring it to the king.

“Very clever,” remarked Eurystheus, stroking the
golden antlers. “But you'll have to have an even better
plan now. Your next labor is to bring me the Ery-
manthian boar alive.”

A wild, fierce boar is not easy to kill, but it is easier
to kill one than to catch it alive. This, however, was
what Hercules succeeded in doing. He chased it into
the deepest fields of newly fallen snow. Its head
could barely rise above the snow banks. Each new
turn it took sank it in powdery fluff. It became so
tired, it only snorted with relief when Hercules picked
it up and threw it over his mighty shoulders.

After he brought the boar to Eurystheus, Hercules
set out for a short while with Jason and the Argonauts,
who were leaving on their great sailing adventure in
quest of the Golden Fleece. The Argonauts honored
him as a hero, but when he was late for their depar-
ture from an island, they left him behind. He had
been searching for his missing friend Hylas. Hercules
eventually made his way back to Tiryns and asked
Eurystheus for his next labor.

This labor was the dirtiest ever performed. “Your
fifth labor,” said Eurystheus, “is to clean out the
Augean stables in one single day.” Augeas was a
neighboring king, and he had herds and herds of
cattle. The stables were filled with cow dung, as
Augeas, a king with too much pride, would never
bother to clean them out. ~

Hercules proceeded to the land of Augeas, where,
holding his nose, he offered the king his services.

“I'd like to clean out your stables today,” said
Hercules.“Help yourself,” said Augeas. “I don't want to do it.
I'll pay you a good sum of gold should you succeed.”

Before the day was out, the mighty son of Zeus had
diverted the paths of two rivers through the stables
and so washed ail the filth away.

“I am not going to count that labor,” said King
Eurystheus, “for | have learned that you were paid for
it. For your next task, go chase away the nasty
Stymphalian birds.”

Hercules went off to Lake Stymphalos, and was
amazed by the number of birds. There were too many
for him to kill, and he wondered if he would fail in
this labor. But good, wise Athena came to him from
Mount Olympos and gave him a pair of brass casta-
nets. Hercules stood upon a mountain overlooking
the lake and knocked these castanets together. The
birds screeched and cawed, flying away from the
horrible din Hercules was creating.

Once they were all gone, Hercules returned to
Tiryns.

“What cannot you do?” said Eurystheus.

“Ido not know,” replied Hercules.

“Then kindly bring me the Savage Cretan bull, that
father of the Minotaur—but do not kill it.”

“As you wish,” said Hercules. He went across the
sea to Crete and, as usual, captured the requested
animal. When he returned with it to Tiryns, the king
was amazed.

Hercules then released the bull. The bull bucked
and stormed, and ran crazily through the countryside.
“The next labor, Hercules,” said the king, “is to
bring me the man-eating horses of Diomedes.” These
four beasts were so fierce they ate men as hungrily as
other horses eat apples.

But before he came to these horses in Thrace, he
stopped in Pherae and performed one of his greatest
feats—he wrestled Death itself for the life of Alcestis.
She was the wife of Hercules’ friend Admetus, and
she had offered herself to Death in the place of her
husband. When Hercules arrived at Admetus’ palace,
he found everyone in gloom, grieving for Alcestis. As
a gift to his friend, Hercules went to the tomb of

‘Alcestis. He found Death drinking the funeral offerings

her family had left there. Hercules grabbed Death
rom behind, pinning his arms.

“Give me back Alcestis, and | shall free you,”
declared Hercules.

Death struggled, groaning, but could not free him-
self from the muscular arms of the son of Zeus. “Very
well,” cried Death, “you have won. Take her back to
Admetus. But some day I shall return for her—and for
you!”

“Indeed,” answered Hercules, “but not for many
years—when Alcestis is old and gray. As for me, I will
gain immortality and avoid your cold grip.”

Admetus was overjoyed by Hercules’ rescue of his
wife and asked Hercules to stay on as his guest. But
Hercules had more labors to accomplish.

From Pherae, Hercules went off to Thrace to find
Diomedes'’ fierce horses. He tamed them and rounded
them up, bringing them down to the sea, and soon
after delivered them to Eurystheus.

The ninth labor seemed more difficult.
“I want the Amazon Hippolyte's belt,” said Eurys-
theus. Queen Hippolyte had received this belt from
the war god Ares, because she was the greatest
warrior in that battle-loving nation of women. Her-
cules came to her in a humble fashion, simply telling
her who he was and what he needed. Hippolyte was
so pleased to meet the famous Hercules that she
agreed to give him her belt. As she unfastened it, her
women warriors, jealous of their queen's kind looks
on Hercules, attacked the hero. In the battle, all was
confusion, and unhappy Hercules accidentally killed
poor Hippolyte. He sorrowfully took the belt and
returned with it to Tiryns.

“Bring me the cattle of Geryon,” said King
Eurystheus.

Hercules set out and on the island of Erythia met
the monstrous cowherd Geryon, a three-bodied man,
joined together at the waist. His watchdog was the
two-headed Orthos. The double-barking canine at-
tacked Hercules, but the son of Zeus clubbed its
brains from its heads. Then Geryon, all three of him,
rushed at Hercules. Mighty Hercules did not know
which part of Geryon to kill first, He stepped back
and shot an arrow at Geryon’s middle, killing him
altogether. Hercules then captured Geryon’s cattle.

Hercules had performed ten labors, but Eurystheus
was not willing to count Hercules’ destruction of the
Hydra, since he had had help, or the cleaning of the
Augean stables, for which he had been paid. Eurys-
theus insisted on two more labors, and Hercules
agreed to do them. The eleventh labor was to go and
get the splendid golden apples of the Hesperides,
near where mighty Atlas held up the sky.

Before Hercules reached Atlas, he rescued Atlas’
brother, Prometheus, whom Zeus had bound to a cliff
to be pecked at every day by a bloodthirsty eagle.
Hercules slew the eagle and cut off Zeus’s bands.
Prometheus, in thanks, told Hercules not to try to get
the golden apples himself, but to ask Atlas to do it for
him.

The great Titan Atlas, standing at the edge of the
world, had been straining under the weight of the sky,
keeping it from crushing the earth, ever since Zeus
assigned him this task. This was Atlas’ punishment
for having fought against Zeus in the fateful war with
Kronos.

Mighty Hercules came and asked Atlas if he knew
where the golden apples were.

Atlas said, “Yes, I do. They're just over there in my
garden. Help yourself.” But there was a huge and
hungry snake the size of a dragon guarding the apple
tree.

Hercules replied, “Perhaps you would like a rest
from your duty? I could hold ‘up the sky for you while
you went in and picked me a few apples.”

Atlas thought about this for a moment, and then
agreed,When he returned with the apples—the snake had
not dared to bother him—and saw Hercules stooping
and straining beneath the sky's weight, he realized
_ how glad he was to have been relieved of that tedious
task.

He saw this as a chance to pass off his duty onto
Hercules. “My friend,” he said, “you are doing such a
good job in my stead, | will let you go on doing it.”

Hercules understood Atlas’ trick. “Very well, mighty
Titan. It's no trouble to me. But wait a moment.
Before you go, would you mind holding the sky while
] put a soft pad across my head and shoulders?”

Atlas, though the brother of clever Prometheus,
wasn't so smart. He set down the apples he had
fetched for Hercules and laughed, saying, “I myself
have never needed a cushion. But, all right, let me
lend you a hand.”

As Hercules stepped out from underneath the sky,
Atlas shouldered the burden. He watched Hercules
pick up the apples.

“But you're staying here!” cried Atlas. “You won't
need those!”

“Farewell, Atlas!” said Hercules, going on his way.

Atlas stamped his foot, but he couldn’t do anything
about Hercules’ deceitful trick.

The final labor that Eurystheus gave Hercules was
to fetch the terrible watchdog of Hades, three-headed
Cerberus. Hercules journeyed into the underworld
and asked Hades himself for permission to borrow
his dog. Hades answered, “Go right ahead, nephew,
by all means. But use no weapon to make him follow
you.”

Hercules pulled his lion skin tight over his body
and crept up on the keen-eyed dog. Just as the dog's
heads began to bark, Hercules sprang and wrestled
the beast until it gave up the fight and rolled over
and, showing its belly, licked Hercules’ hands. It
followed him away from the gloomy underworld to
King Eurystheus. The king shuddered at the sight of
the dog he would see all too soon.

“Take him away!” cried Eurystheus. “And leave me
alone. You have performed your labors. Now go!”

Hercules laughed at the cowardly king and led the
bewildered dog back home.

The mighty son of Zeus had succeeded in his
labors, earning the right to live forever among the
Olympian gods.